what was the hardest thing to adjust to
when you first came into this prison
I've always naively I guess thought that
women were the gentler sex that the
weaker sex that's what society wants us
to believe
and the fact that women can stab a man
to death 40 times I find that
incomprehensible
[Music]
south of Chicago in the state of Indiana
to prisons hold some of America's most
dangerous female criminals
[Music]
the Rockville Correctional Facility and
Indiana women's prison house over 1,800
effectors many are serving long
sentences for extremely violent crimes
some will end there Daisy how severely
was the victim hurt the bullet came into
close contact with his eye and brought
him in the face yes for four weeks I was
given access to a world and a culture
the like of which I've never known so
you were cast as a baby killer I was
that I am that I'm a lot more than that
as well but that's who I am
America imprisons more women than
anywhere else in the world
[Music]
my second visit to Indiana women's
prison began in its segregation unit the
prisoners here are among the most
dangerous and some have been punished
for breaking the rules they locked down
for 23 hours a day and have no contact
with the rest of the institution okay
thank you very much for coming out to
the earth self talk to us how long have
you been in this segregation unit in
about a week it'll be four months what's
that like it's hard especially being
pregnant you're pregnant yeah well when
did you find out you were pregnant where
um when I got arrested they gave me a
pregnancy test at the county jail well I
was there and I found out there and I
was already like a month in my pregnancy
cuz I'm five months right now it's one
thing to be pregnant in any general
prison population must be particularly
agonizing to be pregnant and to be in a
segregated cell yeah like I said you
feel alone you feel like I mean it's so
depressing to her like every day at six
o'clock we're when we get mail you sit
there on your bed and you look under
your door to see if you get mail and
when you don't like I sit there and I
cry because I feel like everybody just
forgot about me and being pregnant is
even worse because my hormones are
driving me crazy one minute I'm mad
even matter one minute I'm really upset
it's just an emotional rollercoaster in
this little room by myself when was your
last communication with the father of
your child
before we came here is this your first
baby
no she's five she's what my mother right
now what does your five-year-old make of
your situation because she is probably
of the age where she's just about
beginning to comprehend that her mother
is not around oh yeah I talked to her
she knows that I've been in trouble and
she tells me like it is I'll call her at
home and she'll tell me why can't you
just stop beginning trouble and be home
with me you know she tells me she's like
the mom and I'm the child I smell it
seems like right now
[Music]
Boyd escaped from a prison Werth program
which was based in the local community
her punishment is six months in this
unit pregnant women who don't follow the
rules and who have committed less
serious crimes are put in a separate
wing once they're about to give birth
they are taken to a local hospital their
babies will then spend the first months
of their lives back
[Music]
Brook how long have you been in prison
I've been here since September and when
was born December 6 what's his name
Hayden Hayden how well did they look
after you in this person team up when
you were in the advanced stages of your
pregnancy
they were that for us really well once I
had to go and be induced so they took me
out like a Wednesday out evening and I
went to the hospital got induced and I
had him later on that night and we get
to stay there 24 to 48 hours depending
on whether you bottle fader breastfeed
how does that work in hospital you do
you have a somebody looking over you you
have a guard there while you give birth
yes the officer usually sits in the room
24/7 and you're shackled to the bed
unless you're in active labor then they
actually let you stay in shackled until
your give birth after you give birth you
have to get out go back to the bed
you're shackled to abandon just your
ankle just your ankle but you're
shackled to yes not the most propitious
no circumstances in which to have
something which is so intensely yeah
personal it was very embarrassing very
lazy may I see the cell where you spend
most of it your time yes thank you
let's see yes how different would this
be in its physical surroundings if you
were at home home he would have his own
room I wouldn't have my bed in here he
would have a dresser changing table what
what would you tell your son when he is
old enough about where he was born and
the circumstances in which he was born I
really haven't thought about that
question yet
I would just tell him that Mommy made a
big mistake and it was for the better
why I came here made mommy learn a lot
and I hope he can learn from my mistakes
and see how burying it was to be here
and hopefully he didn't ever come to a
place like this you tell him he was born
in prison
it's visiting time and Kim is preparing
to take baby Gabriella outside the
at times like these offenders are
sharply reminded of where they are so
you have to be accompanied by these
visits out came dude when we have the
babies yes yes why is that um just for
their safety
I mean your sexual offenders here that
have done crimes like that so that's one
of the reasons why we escorted it's
difficult to to believe that people will
want to do anything to a child being
taken out to a visiting area it might
happen yeah and you have to make sure he
does yes sir this after all Kim is a is
a women's prison say it's rather
difficult to imagine that a woman would
do something against a child oh yeah for
me it's it's hard for me to fathom that
a mother or any woman would be able to
do that to a child but it it happens and
there's actually women in this prison
they have hurt their children yeah yeah
I could imagine
this is Rockville Correctional Facility
the largest women's prison in the state
of Indiana with more than 1,200 Collins
can attract great is taking me to
dormitory fine one of the largest the
prison
[Music]
inmates here allowed the freedom of the
unit during the day come nighttime
they're locked in sixteen into a year
are there outbreaks of disorder with 16
women in one small space occasionally
yeah we have just like any other
environment where you have that many
people in a small space once they get on
each other's nerves to the point that
that they feel a physical altercation or
a verbal altercation is their only means
of resolution then we'll have arguments
or fights from time to time much more
fundamentally how do you how do you
choose or do you choose who is one of
the sixteen in one of those rooms and
how do you do that we just saw it
through through the offender's behavior
those those offenders who display more
difficult behavior we have closer to the
officers station would you put say
somebody who has been guilty of check
fraud with somebody who's committed
murder would you would you put them in
one doughnut yes we would because it
again is predicated more by the be the
offenders behavior once they're in the
environment than it is by the crimes of
behavior yes absolutely
I've been told about one of the most
difficult people in this year Kiana ball
is in for armed robbery
hello I'm Trevor Kiana how are you I'm
good
it's a very crowded space to be in
yes it is it's it's kind of odd being in
a room with so many females and not
really having your own personal space
like you have your own personal space
but this it seems like it's not enough
what's the atmosphere like when
everybody is here it can be a little
off-balance a little frustrating because
all the different moods and attitudes
that it's like a lot of different
personalities and they tend to clash and
you have like half the room has their
good days and then half the room has
their bad days so it's like it's real
crazy it's real crazy out of earshot of
her cellmates I asked to talk to Bo
about her crime
[Music]
in 2009 P Anna ball and her boyfriend
Carlton write attempted to steal a van
that gun
the owner Ronaldo Santiago resistant
and we'll shop point-9 drink this is
ball and write moments after the
shooting
they hide their weapons in a nearby
apartment drunk
when she was arrested police discovered
these guns in Kiana balls Hannah how are
you now I'm 22 I would be 23 November in
November so you were 19 years of age
when you came to prison it's a lot to
handle and I have kids at home so that
makes it a little more harder to cope
with than anything how many kids do you
have at home I have two kids at home I
have a little girl Brianna she's six
she'll be 7 July 16th and I have a four
year old son he's lying
he will be 5 June 12th how are you court
how are you found us we found ourselves
in a jam with a guy that we had met and
things just got out of hands and we were
we were trying to rob him and just
things like I said things got out of
hand fans got carried away and he ended
up being shot and we you shot him yes
how severely was the victim hurt he was
severely hurt one the left side of his
face the bullet came into close contact
with his eye and talked him in the face
yes it came into close contact with the
side of his face by his eye
now he's permanently blind in his left
eye
what's your emotional response knowing
what the consequence of your action was
I didn't have any feeling at all about
it
I didn't feel sorry about it I didn't
regret it I didn't want to take it back
I didn't want to fix anything I didn't
feel I didn't feel bad at all
but after the fact I felt bad because
it's like this is the innocent man I
don't know him from anywhere he doesn't
know me from anywhere he's never done
anything to me because we don't know
each other so when I thought about us
like I almost so the innocent man's life
and your sentence was my sentence was I
signed a plea pleading guilty to armed
robbery with serious bodily injury and I
was sentenced to 30 years to 15 you have
to deal too with the realization that
the formative years of your children's
development yes we're gone without you
it bothers me because like all the
little things and I'm missing out on or
all the little things that I would love
to be there for like my son's first day
of school just all the little things is
what are the most important to me so it
hurts it is quite conceivable that they
might have been out of school by the
time you yeah yeah there's a possibility
that's if I don't keep if I don't keep
myself out of trouble and I keep down
the path that I found myself being on
getting into trouble constantly in and
out of like if I keep myself on that
path then I'll find myself not getting
home to my kids until they're grown and
that's something I don't want to happen
I want to almost do that I think yes
so I would like to make it home to them
before it's too late I would like to be
able to spend some time with them before
their - groans
keyonna ball is one of those who finds
it extremely difficult to cope with life
in prison compounded by the fact that
bad conduct has got her an additional
nine years
[Music]
evening recreation at Rockford
prisoners have an hours free time before
glider
[Music]
the tedium of the unimaginable sameness
of long days poses difficulties for even
the toughest defenders
[Music]
and the Sun there's the constant pain
living with the memory of what you did
Dorn Hopkins was convicted of the
battery and manslaughter of her
three-month-old son after almost 15
years she's about to be released Devine
if we interrupt your game for a brief
while how much how much time do you get
to play table tennis every day we spend
about an hour a day doing that Monday
through Friday it gives us something to
do it gets us off the housing unit it's
a little bit of exercise but it's not
real intense how long have you been in
this facility
I've been incarcerated in this facility
for one year but I've been incarcerated
for 14 and a half years 14 and a half
years
yes but it's almost over I have two
years left in like 29 months I go home
in your darkest moments here have you
reflected on the circumstances which
actually brought you to prison yes three
months into my incarceration I tried to
take my own life because I couldn't deal
with the guilt of what I had done to
bring my stuff here I was very lucky
that an officer found me and saved my
life
I hung myself three months into my stay
you tried to hang yourself yes I did I
was facing the rest of my life
incarcerated I was 25 years old I had
taken another person's life and I
couldn't live with that and I did try to
take my own life when I was first
incarcerated so the trigger for your
attempting to take your own life was the
fact that you were looking ahead at this
vast expanse of time that you had to do
in jail and the guilt the guilt of
taking somebody's life the pain that I
had caused my family and I just felt
like I was never gonna be able to do
anything positive with my life ever
again it must be strange to think of
going home after all this time
actually it's terrifying the world has
changed in so many ways and when I'm
done I'll have done 16 years in the
amount of ways that the world has
changed in that time it's scary and I
don't have a lot of family support so it
would be like standing on my own two
feet for the first time in my life
what was your earlier life like I was a
full-time college student I have a
bachelor's degree in accounting and I
ran a bar that my stepdad owned when I
go home I also have a degree in
philosophy that I've earned since I've
been incarcerated when I go home I'm
hoping to eventually own my own like
bakery coffee shop I want to get my
pastry chef license and do that kind of
stuff when I go home you seem to work it
out pretty well you've you seem
determined not to be somebody who comes
back and you have a plan for your life
in the future absolutely I think that's
what you have to do you have to set
goals and you have to turn your dream
into a goal set the steps and accomplish
them one at a time to be able to reach
your goal otherwise you're just treading
water
the most prisoners here
trading water is the sum total of their
lives and I'm about to meet a woman who
spent more time in prison than any other
in the state of Indiana
[Music]
at Indiana women's prison 69 inmates are
here for life
they will of course be denied any chance
of a return to their families for the
majority that's the agony that
constantly wants one of the prisoners
here came to the space years ago as a
teenager
this is called the programs mitten is
court is officer Frank Brian morning
thank you community outreach he lays the
bear are working on will I believe some
of the things are making I've been here
since I was 16 years old I've done 38
years so you've been here since 6 yeah I
don't get out much yeah they've been
here since you were 16 yes
yeah but that's a pretty early age to
come to prison yeah
I'm the youngest I was the youngest
offender ever here and now the longest
one to have ever spent as much time here
yeah that's your tag yes I've got the
shortest deal Susie number which ei did
you come to this prison which year 75
1975 for 1975 yes I've never driven a
car
I never went on a date never had a
checking account I was never able to be
a mother but a lot of these people in
here that are younger I'm mom do you
have many family connections do people
come to visit you my sister does with
her kids and her great and her grandkids
so I still have a connection out there
yeah how do they regard you what do they
think of you and of your situation oh
they want me to come home they want me
to my hurts yeah what my two nieces they
went and broke their piggy bank and took
their money to their mom my sister and
said is this enough to get aunt Cindy
out gosh yeah and that that's what makes
me emotional
it's it's very difficult to me to talk
about to talk to somebody who's been in
this situation for 38 years when I look
back on my life and think all the things
I have done in that time and to some
extent yours has it's in a box you came
in to prison at age 16 what for murder I
committed murder what were the
circumstances in which you killed
someone I was abused
I was extremely abused from basically a
home that I was living at and I tried to
leave and I set a fire trying to get out
and it got out of hand and they died in
the fire so you started the fire trying
to escape right and how many people six
six people were in the house yes and
they died yes did you not know there
were people there I knew the people were
there what I was thinking was if I set a
fire then everybody can get out and I
can run that was my intentions the fire
got out of hand how quickly were you
apprehended a couple of months later I
was in the hospital because I was on I
had burns yeah so you burnt yourself to
trying to save them that's how I got
burnt I kept trying to go back into the
house to get him didn't didn't work no
this is probably a brutal way of putting
it and I acknowledge that but the fact
is for you this is it right you will end
your life here you will end your days
here mmhmm yeah I am looking forward to
growing old in here because I'm looking
forward to that yes because you know I
I'm going to know that my life is not
going to be much longer and there's
something always positive on the other
side and I believe that it's very good
to meet you it's good thank you thank
you thank you for talking to me thank
you god bless you thank you all of you
[Music]
early channel mana
another day is beginning falafel
although the majority of inmates you
released into the community one day
prisoners talk endlessly about years of
family life they admit the story of one
of the people here though is different
she watched her children grow up when by
law she should have been doing life for
mud
Linda Darby's story is remarkable by any
standard
[Music]
in 1972 she escaped from prison she went
on the run for more than 30 years and in
that time managed to create an entirely
new life to evade capture she abandoned
the family and the town she knew she set
out to start again in a smaller town in
Tennessee
Darby's escape from the Indiana State
women's prison was bloody I was
scratched and bloody and everything from
going over the barbed wire past 30 years
or so the now 64 year old has been
living in Pulaski even Darby doesn't
know how she kept her 30-year secret
married with two children eight
grandchildren a play set is in the
backyard she cleaned houses for a living
today though this fugitive has a message
for people who believed her to be Linda
McElroy and not Linda Darby this is who
I am this is who I am
so you escaped and you decided to make a
clean breast of it start a new life I
just changed my last name changed one
digit to my social security and that's
how I survived were you always in a
position where you were looking over
your shoulder wondering whether the next
tap on your shoulder would be that of a
of an arresting officer policeman
somebody in authority there's always the
chance I would just I just kept asking
God please let me raise my children
I couldn't imagine them not being able
to take care of themselves
did you ever confide in anybody at all
about what had happened to you no there
was nobody you felt you could talk to
about your life in prison before I know
that if I'm involved them then that
would put them in the middle of it too
so no I don't know but it must be
difficult when people talk about their
lives you know you drifted to talking
about what you did earlier how was how
was it possible never to mention
anything about your past to your closest
friends it was hard it was
but I just kept it with them on the day
that policeman came to your house on
that fateful day what were you what were
you planning to do on that day I had
just got through working I was working
for cleaning house that day and we had
came in fix dinner and I was sitting at
the kitchen table smoking a cigarette my
daughter went to the phone I went to the
door and Joe Robertson who was the
policeman that came to the house and I
knew him for thirty years he said I'm
going to show you this picture and Linda
tell me if you know who this person is
and I said it's me he said no he said I
told him they were wrong he said I've
known you 30 years I said Joe what's the
sense of me lying I could sit here and
lie all day to you and fingerprints
don't lie I said do you know what soon
as you took my fingerprints what did you
say to your children
I tell me and they said mom were behind
you a hundred percent because we know
you didn't do it I told him that back in
nineteen seventy I was accused and
convicted then killing my first or my
second husband
what did they say they said we don't
believe it we know you didn't do it and
my husband said the same thing were you
surprised that you were an escaped
prisoner for so long that it's
surprising mm-hmm and now now all I can
do is try my best to work my way out
legally walking out the front door I've
never heard a story of somebody who's
been on the run for 35 years I've never
heard anything quite like it
Linda Darby will probably die in this
prison but unlike the other women here
she has memories of 35 years of freedom
[Music]
I'm back at Indiana women's prison
I'm here to see one inmate whose story I
had found particularly disturbed
Cindy white has the unenviable record
that being the longest-serving female
prisoner in the state of Indiana a
release for her is unlocked at the start
of her sentence
she was a teenager she's appealed
against that sentence again and again
[Music]
Cindy white was in court again today and
her attorney asked the judge for just
one thing that the court considered
whether she was competent to stand trial
at the time that she went to trial in
1976 but the Johnson County prosecutor
says Cindy white deserves to be in just
one place in prison for the murder of a
number of people six people Charles and
Carol Roberson with four of their
children who all burned in a fire that
white sent more than 20 years ago in
this Greenwood neighborhood I set the
fire it wasn't to kill anybody it was to
ask my way of asking for help but white
now says that she was not fit to stand
trial back in 1976 she claims that she
had been traumatized by years of sexual
abuse by her father and even by the
people she eventually murdered today
Cindy white hopes that a judge will
overturn her murder convictions
none of her appeals has been successful
the last is about 10 years
remember my extended family has said
that I have created here about yeah well
this lady right here this needle
pointing this is my daughter Evie
all right fine yes she taught you a lot
yes she's probably the strongest woman
I've ever met
really why do you say that because I
can't imagine being faced with what
she's been faced with and staying as
strong as she is having been here for
such a such a long time yes here it's
kind of like you see what you get it's
we've all been kind of in the same boat
heart disappointed despair so when you
can reach out to someone that's walked
in your shoes then it makes it easier so
which is your bottom one oh the messy
one welcome to my home well home wish I
shared with yes this is my bunkie would
you introduce yourself Cheyenne
Pennington
hello and we'll get along really well
I'm mama to her she says another member
of your extended yeah I get them both
without even realize I have them and
which is the old bun this is my bunk
this is where I am secluded then I come
in and when I don't want to be bothered
with somebody or just alone I will pull
out and get down there and hide for just
a little bit you must have seen a people
come and go here all over the years yeah
this unit there's a lot of ins and outs
what we call they finish their time and
they go home and I really don't deal
with them too much because well it hurts
because you see people who come here you
get to know them and then they leave and
you stay yeah and it hurts I'm not going
to say it does it because I really
wanted to have that hope of going home
but as it is now I know what's for real
and I had to be in reality I can't hope
on us hopes but it's so it's a recurring
hurt because you see people come and go
yes constantly I'm excited to see them
go home because I know that they're
gonna be doing something that I can't do
and that has been with their family but
I have made a family in care to take
away the pain why do they keep you why
in your mind if they decided to keep you
in these conditions I don't know that's
a question I ask all the time is what is
it that I am NOT doing you know if they
tell me what it is that I can do to say
okay yes you can go I'll be more than
happy to I'll be more than happy to do
it you've been up for parole
I've been up several times and each time
I'm refused and I finally got tired I
because the disappointment when I go up
before him I'm like yes this year I'm
going home I just know it there's no
other way but I'm tired of doing that
and I'm tired of getting my feelings
hurt and I figured this way if they
haven't let me go in 37 years that I
have tried to go they're never gonna let
me go
so I've got to make do with what I have
and make the best of it how have you
survived this for somebody is I tried to
find somebody worse off than me I tried
to find someone that needs a kind word
that needs a hug
that needs to be shown that they care I
need to care for something or someone I
want to love I want to be loved it's a
kind of escape from which there is in
fact no escape yeah it's just that you
find that thing that makes you want to
say okay I'm gonna be okay today and
hold on to it however you mentally come
to terms with it it's a very difficult
adjustment to make
I want something to show for my life
other than a DLC member prison prison
record number and right now I don't have
it there's nothing out there that says
Sarah Sydney white exists other than the
number
[Music]
I'm on my way again to the Rockville
Correctional Facility
for the last time
[Music]
of the litany of crime is in here about
in this prison perhaps the most shocking
is that of the mother who kills her
child
[Music]
I come to see an inmate I
Don Hopkins is now looking for to her
release
she had been forced to give up her first
two children because she'd abuse
[Music]
but in 2001 she was convicted of killing
her third child three-month-old
how often do you reflect on the chain of
circumstances which actually got you
here
sometimes it just sneaks up on you like
that and you don't even realize it and
you're happy and then you realize that
you're sad you know and it's something
that maybe it's a song that played or
something that somebody said or last
weekend was Mother's Day and somebody
wished me a happy Mother's Day and it
was not good it just brings all of that
back your son was only three months old
the realization that you took the life
of someone to whom you gave birth must
be probably the most horrendous thing of
all absolutely you know I I could still
remember when I found out I was pregnant
you know I was six weeks pregnant and
they did this ultrasound and there was
this little life and you know they told
me it was like an inch and a half long
and at that moment you could see his
heartbeat and I promised at that moment
to keep him safe forever and I didn't
and that makes me feel like a monster
and it makes me feel like I don't even
deserve to be alive some days as an
educated person you must go through a
lot of self-analysis you must look back
and Hannah try to analyze your actions I
don't I honestly don't even have an
answer for you my
I don't know I struggled with postpartum
depression after the birth of my son I
was seeing a psychologist regularly I
was actually in his office the day that
I took the life of my son it was a
normal everyday day I had been to the
craft store buy a Christmas stocking for
him it was right before Halloween and I
sat you know working on the little felt
pieces for this stocking for him for his
first Christmas and you know it was just
him and I that day and I I don't know
he was fussy because he was running a
had a cold and I don't know I I lost my
dipper and I should have been better
than that was that a moment of blind
rage in a moment life change you know I
was sitting on the couch feeding him
giving him a bottle and talking to my
mom on the phone watching The Simpsons
in 15 minutes later I was on the phone
to the paramedics getting instructions
on doing CPR because he wasn't breathing
Wow gosh that said it's terrible to tell
the moment life happens in a moment you
know and you never you take life for
granted you never realize what moment
it's going to be that your life is gonna
change forever
what did you do when you discovered your
son wasn't breathing I called the
paramedic I called 911 to the paramedics
began performing CPR until police
officer came in and took over CPR then
the paramedics got there we all went in
an ambulance to the hospital they after
they called in saying that they had a
child coming in with unresponsive so
they had a chaplain there waiting to
talk to me when I got there and they
weren't able to get his heart beating
again but due to the brain damage his he
was not breathing on his own such a
brain damaged yes
he's he died from shaken baby syndrome
how quickly did they blame you for your
son's death but they didn't blame me I
was honest with them I told them exactly
what happened as much as I could
remember because at that point all I
wanted to do was save his life as
possible and it didn't matter what
happened to me going through that long
process of being in police custody that
must have been pretty traumatic knowing
what had happened there were death
threats made against me and what white
people thought you were you were a child
killer the mother who kills her child is
probably held up as one of the most yes
the Rif in our society I mean the only
other the most contemptuous would be a
sex offender you know somebody that's a
pedophile other than that your baby
killers so you were casted as a baby
killer I was that I am that I'm a lot
more than that as well but that's who I
am
I eventually took my leave of Indiana
and the many women behind bars in this
state the thoughts that stay with me are
of horrendous crime some is staggeringly
long sentences the thoughts to have
wasted lovers and the family is left
behind
[Music]